feat: add article for optimizing s3 endpoints (#1511)
iasql/iasql: site/blog/2022-10-28-optimize-s3-endpoints.mdx

---
slug: optimize-your-s3-endpoints
title: Optimize your S3 endpoints for cost and efficiency
authors: [yrobla]
---

# Optimize your S3 endpoints for cost and efficiency

> Are you using S3 buckets as part of your cloud deployments ? How are you accessing them?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Are you using S3 buckets as part of your cloud deployments? How are you accessing them?
```

But there is a more optimal solution, that is creating <a
href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpc-endpoints-s3.html"
target="_blank"> gateway or interface VPC endpoints</a> for each region where you have buckets exposed.

When the VPC endpoints are enabled you could access your S3 buckets using this endpoint. This will allow you
to control your buckets from internal network with the desired security, and without the extra costs of a
NAT gateway.

### Why use VPC Interface Endpoints

The two main reasons are **security** and **performance**.

**Security: no internet traversal**

When using endpoints, services will be accessed via Amazon's internal networks to route the traffic. This is
essential for security services or when hosting any content with sensitive data.

**Security: policies**

Many of the servcies are supporting the use of policies, that can be used to determine the traffic that can
pass through the interface.

**Performance: latency**

Because of the traffic staying within Amazon’s networks, the physical distance travelled, the number of hops

> and the risk of traversing congested networks are all significantly lower.{' '}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the risk of traversing congested networks are all significantly lower.
```

**Performance: bandwidth**

> PrivateLink supports a sustained bandwidth of 10 Gbps per availability zone with bursts up to 40 Gbps.

Reviewer: I guess `PrivateLink` is the internal AWS network? We start mention it here but not before. Probably is worth to make a mention on what it is here or before when we explain how it works?

**Performance: stability**

PrivateLink consistently lowers the amount of errors and timeouts on high loads

> **Do you want to know if you have it properly configured? Please use this query to check it:**

Reviewer: the following query will check for active S3 VPC Interface Endpoints?

Reviewer 2: Agree with @aguillenv 's rephrasing.

```suggestion
**Do you want to know if you have it properly configured? The followign query will check for active S3 VPC interface endpoints:**
```

    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Check your endpoints</button>
  </a>
</p>

Have you found missing endpoints? No problem, IaSQL can generate them for you. You can create two different
types of endpoints: gateway and interface. We're going to describe their main features and you could create
the desired type in an automated way.

## Endpoint interfaces

> And endpoint interface is an elastic network interface with a private IP address that serves as an entry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint interface is an elastic network interface with a private IP address that serves as an entry
```

TCP traffic.

An interface endpoint (except S3 interface endpoint) has corresponding private DNS hostnames, that can be
used to access the resources.

Endpoint interfaces cover a wide range of services such as S3, Lambda, API Gateway, etc...

<p>
  <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Add S3 endpoint interfaces/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_interface%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%0Aon%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_interface%20where%20endpoint_interface.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_interface.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%3B%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">
    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Add missing endpoint interfaces</button>
  </a>
</p>

By clicking on the button, our engine will auto-generate the missing endpoint interfaces and will allow you
to preview the changes to be applied on your cloud.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can add here at the end a link to the AWS docs in endpoint interfaces? Like `Get more detail about ...`

In order to use them, DNS resolution must be enabled in the VPC.

When that route is added, all instances in the subnets associated with the route table will automatically
use the endpoint to access the service.

Gateway endpoints only support S3 and DynamoDB services.

<a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Add S3 endpoint interfaces/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_gateway%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%20on%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_gateway%20where%20endpoint_gateway.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_gateway.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">
  <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Add missing endpoints gateways</button>
</a>

By clicking on the button, our engine will auto-generate the missing endpoint gateways and will allow you to
preview the changes to be applied on your cloud.

> 

Reviewer: Same here

---
slug: optimize-your-s3-endpoints
title: Optimize your S3 endpoints for cost and efficiency
authors: [yrobla]
---

# Optimize your S3 endpoints for cost and efficiency

Are you using S3 buckets as part of your cloud deployments? How are you accessing them?

> When not configured properly, access to the S3 buckets may need internet access. One simple but costly way

Reviewer 2: "may need internet access" reads a bit confusingly, since technically all S3 access is going to be done with a TCP connection. Perhaps:

```suggestion
When not configured properly, access to the S3 buckets may need to be accessed over the public internet. One simple but costly way
```

is to rely on <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/en_en/vpc/latest/userguide/vpc-nat-gateway.html" target="_blank">NAT gateways</a>.

> But there is a more optimal solution, that is creating <a

Reviewer 2: Formally you're not supposed to begin a sentence with words like "but" or "and", etc. But that's also English teachers imposing Romance language grammar rules on Germanic English, so we can ignore that. ;) (Some people do get annoyed by that, though.)

Author: spanglish in use :)

href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/vpc-endpoints-s3.html"

> target="_blank"> gateway or interface VPC endpoints</a> for each region where you have buckets exposed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
target="_blank">gateway or interface VPC endpoints</a> for each region where you have buckets exposed.
```

> When the VPC endpoints are enabled you could access your S3 buckets using this endpoint. This will allow you

Reviewer 2: Nit

```suggestion
When the VPC endpoints are enabled you can access your S3 buckets using this endpoint. This will allow you
```

> to control your buckets from internal network with the desired security, and without the extra costs of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to control your buckets from an internal network with the desired security, and without the extra costs of a
```

NAT gateway.

### Why use VPC Interface Endpoints

> AWS VPC Interface Endpoints are a component of <a href="https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink">PrivateLink</a> infrastructure. AWS PrivateLink provides private connectivity between virtual private clouds (VPCs),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
AWS VPC Interface Endpoints are a component of AWS's <a href="https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink">PrivateLink</a> infrastructure. AWS PrivateLink provides private connectivity between virtual private clouds (VPCs),
```

> supported AWS services, and your on-premises networks withoutexposing your traffic to the public internet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
supported AWS services, and your on-premises networks without exposing your traffic to the public internet.
```

Relying on PrivateLink offers a set of advantages in terms of **security** and **performance**.

**Security: no internet traversal**

When using endpoints, services will be accessed via Amazon's internal networks to route the traffic. This is

> essential for security services or when hosting any content with sensitive data.

Reviewer 2: What are "security services" and how is it essential? You could always SSL encrypt your traffic for security reasons.

I think it would be better to point towards "defense in depth" here, that external attackers can't directly get at services that are kept entirely within a private network, which reduces the surface area to especially harden.

**Security: policies**

> Many of the servcies are supporting the use of policies, that can be used to determine the traffic that can

Reviewer 2: What policies?

pass through the interface.

**Performance: latency**

Because of the traffic staying within Amazon’s networks, the physical distance travelled, the number of hops
and the risk of traversing congested networks are all significantly lower.

**Performance: bandwidth**

PrivateLink supports a sustained bandwidth of 10 Gbps per availability zone with bursts up to 40 Gbps.

**Performance: stability**

> PrivateLink consistently lowers the amount of errors and timeouts on high loads

Reviewer 2: How does it do this? (Also missing a period on this sentence, but I think it needs to be expanded.)

**Do you want to know if you have it properly configured? Please use this query to check it:**

<!--- https://www.urlencoder.org/ -->

<p>
  <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Check S3 endpoints/--%20Installing%20the%20needed%20modules%0ASELECT%20iasql_install%28%27aws_s3%27%29%3B%0ASELECT%20iasql_install%28%27aws_vpc%27%29%3B%0A--%20Sync%20the%20existing%20data%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_sync%28%29%3B%0A--%20Perform%20the%20query%20for%20endpoints%0Aselect%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.is_default%2C%20vpc.cidr_block%2C%0A%28select%20count%28%2A%29%3E0%20from%20endpoint_gateway%20where%20endpoint_gateway.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20service%3D%27s3%27%20and%20endpoint_gateway.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%20as%20has_endpoint_gateway%2C%0A%28select%20count%28%2A%29%3E0%20from%20endpoint_interface%20where%20endpoint_interface.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20service%3D%27s3%27%20and%20endpoint_interface.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%20as%20has_endpoint_interface%0Afrom%20bucket%20left%20outer%20join%20vpc%20on%20vpc.region%3Dbucket.region%3B">
    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Check your endpoints</button>
  </a>
</p>

> This query will find your active S3 buckets for all regions, associated with the existing endpoint gateways or interfaces - if they exist.

Reviewer 2: I am not opposed to having one of the blog posts experiment with the structure itself, but I personally think front-loading these IaSQL queries in the article and *then* explaining all of the ways this is helping you will get more clicks.

Have you found missing endpoints? No problem, IaSQL can generate them for you. You can create two different

> types of endpoints: gateway and interface. We're going to describe their main features and you could create

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
types of endpoints: gateway and interface. We're going to describe their main features and you can create
```

Reviewer 2: I've replaced `could` with `can` in a couple of places because `could` implies an uncertainty that you would do it, while `can` is implying that now you are able to accomplish what you were originally planning to do.

That makes `could` feel like we aren't really endorsing this action and you should take a closer look on if it is the right thing for you to do.

the desired type in an automated way.

## Interface endpoints

An interface endpoint is an elastic network interface with a private IP address that serves as an entry

> point for traffic destined to a supported AWS service. As they use ENIs, they can benefit of security groups

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
point for traffic destined to a supported AWS service. As they use ENIs, they can benefit from security groups
```

Also, "ENIs" is used without definition. Can we link to AWS documentation here, or at least use the full name (I think it's `Elastic Network Interface`) before the acronym?

> to control traffic. Policies can also be added to control access to those endpoints.

Reviewer 2: `Policies` is again used without reference. These are IAM policies, and we should link to AWS documentation on that.

> They are regional, meaning they can only be accessed by the same region they are created. Multi-region is
> possible using VPC peering, so resources in one region can be accessed from others. They only support IPv4
> TCP traffic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They are regional, meaning they can only be accessed by the same region they are created. However, Multi-region is possible by also using VPC peering, so resources in one region can be accessed from others, though this only supports IPv4
TCP traffic.
```

> An interface endpoint (except S3 interface endpoint) has corresponding private DNS hostnames, that can be

Reviewer 2: I think Dynamo also has the same issue? This may be a good place to link to AWS documentation on this, in any case, because "why?" is my immediate question but we start going very off-topic if we try to answer it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An interface endpoint (except S3 interface endpoint) has a corresponding private DNS hostname, that can be
```

> used to access the resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used to access the resource.
```
These two suggestions are just fixing up the subject pluralization, since you use "An interface endpoint) at the beginning, but end the sentence referring to all interface endpoints.

You could alternatively change the beginning to `Interface endpoints (except the S3 interface endpoint) ...`

Interface endpoints cover a wide range of services such as S3, Lambda, API Gateway, etc...

<p>
  <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Add S3 interface endpoints/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_interface%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%0Aon%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_interface%20where%20endpoint_interface.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_interface.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%3B%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">
    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Add missing interface endpoint</button>
  </a>
</p>

> By clicking on the button, our engine will auto-generate the missing interface endpoints and will allow you
> to preview the changes to be applied on your cloud. <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/create-interface-endpoint.html">Get more detail about interface endpoints.</a>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By clicking on the button, our engine will auto-generate the missing interface endpoints and will
preview the changes to be applied on your cloud. Simply uncomment the final statement and run it to make the changes to your cloud account. <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/create-interface-endpoint.html">Get more detail about interface endpoints.</a>
```

Reviewer 2: Also, that last sentence with the link to interface endpoint documentation really doesn't flow in the post.

## Endpoint gateways

> And endpoint gateway is a gateway that can be configured as a target for a route in your route table, used
> to access traffic in DynamoDB or S3

Reviewer 2: Minor fix

```suggestion
An endpoint gateway is a gateway that can be configured as a target for a route in your route table, used
to access traffic in DynamoDB or S3
```

Reviewer 2: However, I feel like this sentence also need restructuring, because of the tautological nature of the beginning of the sentence, and the sheer number of concepts that have not been explained being used as if the reader is familiar with it.

"What even *is* 'my route table'?" - Can very easily lose readers like this.

Multiple gateway endpoints can be created in a single VPC, and those can be used on different route tables
to enforce different access policies from different subnets to the same service.

Gateway endpoints are supported within the same region only, resources from multiple regions cannot be
accssed, even using VPC peering. They also support IPv4 traffic only.

In order to use them, DNS resolution must be enabled in the VPC.

> When that route is added, all instances in the subnets associated with the route table will automatically

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a route is added, all instances in the subnets associated with the route table will automatically
```

use the endpoint to access the service.

Gateway endpoints only support S3 and DynamoDB services.

<a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Add S3 interface endpoints/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_gateway%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%20on%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_gateway%20where%20endpoint_gateway.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_gateway.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">
  <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Add missing endpoints gateways</button>
</a>

By clicking on the button, our engine will auto-generate the missing endpoint gateways and will allow you to

> preview the changes to be applied on your cloud. <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/gateway-endpoints.html">Get more detail about gateway endpoints.</a>

Reviewer 2: Similar comment. The last sentence doesn't really flow with the rest of the post, and may benefit from better explaining what the SQL statements are doing, since the reader will be completely unfamiliar with our own flow here.

## Testing the result

Once all the relevant endpoints have been created, please check your access from internal EC2 instances or

> other resources - please use a VM on the same region as the endpoint you want to test:

Reviewer 2: Why are you asking them to "please check your access"? It implies that we aren't confident that it will fix things. Perhaps changing that to "you can confirm your access to the gateway endpoints from an internal EC2 instance" or something along those lines. Still bringing up that *they* may want to confirm things, but that we are confident that they'll get the expected result.

that can pass through the interface.

**Performance: latency**

Because of the traffic staying within Amazon’s networks, the physical distance travelled, the number of hops
and the risk of traversing congested networks are all significantly lower.

**Performance: bandwidth**

PrivateLink supports a sustained bandwidth of 10 Gbps per availability zone with bursts up to 40 Gbps.

**Performance: stability**

PrivateLink consistently lowers the amount of errors and timeouts on high loads. As the traffic over Private Link stays within
Amazon’s networks, it means a reduction on distance travelled, number of hops, and the risk of traversing congested networks.

In terms of speed, Private Link supports a sustained bandwidth of 10 Gbps per availability zone with bursts up to 40 Gbps.

**Do you want to know if you have it properly configured? The following query will check for active S3 VPC interface endpoints:**

This query will find your active S3 buckets for all regions, associated with the existing endpoint gateways or interfaces - if they exist.

```sql
 -- Installing the needed modules
SELECT
  iasql_install ('aws_s3');

SELECT
  iasql_install ('aws_vpc');

> 

Reviewer: why not just one sql install statement?

      AND service = 's3'
      AND endpoint_interface.vpc_id = vpc.id
  ) AS has_endpoint_interface
FROM
  bucket
  LEFT OUTER JOIN vpc ON vpc.region = bucket.region;
```

<!--- https://www.urlencoder.org/ -->

<p>
  <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Check S3 endpoints/https://app.iasql.com/#/button/CheckS3endpoints/--%20Installing%20the%20needed%20modules%0ASELECT%20iasql_install%28%27aws_s3%27%29%3B%0ASELECT%20iasql_install%28%27aws_vpc%27%29%3B%0A--%20Perform%20the%20query%20for%20endpoints%0Aselect%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.is_default%2C%20vpc.cidr_block%2C%0A%28select%20count%28%2A%29%3E0%20from%20endpoint_gateway%20where%20endpoint_gateway.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20service%3D%27s3%27%20and%20endpoint_gateway.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%20as%20has_endpoint_gateway%2C%0A%28select%20count%28%2A%29%3E0%20from%20endpoint_interface%20where%20endpoint_interface.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20service%3D%27s3%27%20and%20endpoint_interface.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%20as%20has_endpoint_interface%0Afrom%20bucket%20left%20outer%20join%20vpc%20on%20vpc.region%3Dbucket.region%3B">
    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Check your endpoints</button>
  </a>

> </p>

Reviewer: we can update this now to use theButton plugin

## Interface endpoints

An interface endpoint is an elastic network interface with a private IP address that serves as an entry
point for traffic destined to a supported AWS service. As they use ENIs, they can benefit from security groups
to control traffic. Policies can also be added to control access to those endpoints.

They are regional, meaning they can only be accessed by the same region they are created. However, Multi-region is possible by also using VPC peering, so resources in one region can be accessed from others, though this only supports IPv4
TCP traffic.

An interface endpoint (except S3 interface endpoint) has a corresponding private DNS hostname, that can be
used to access the resource.

Interface endpoints cover a wide range of services such as S3, Lambda, API Gateway, etc... <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/create-interface-endpoint.html">
Get more detail about interface endpoints</a>

This query will auto-generate the missing interface endpoints and will preview the changes to be applied on your cloud. Simply uncomment the final statement and run it to make the changes to your cloud account.

```sql
 -- Inserts the missing endpoints

> INSERT INTO

Reviewer: we need to update this by adding the `iasql_begin`

  endpoint_interface (region, vpc_id, service)
SELECT
  bucket.region,
  vpc.id,
  's3'
FROM
  bucket
  INNER JOIN vpc ON bucket.region = vpc.region
WHERE
  NOT EXISTS (
    SELECT
      id
    FROM
      endpoint_interface
    WHERE
      endpoint_interface.region = bucket.region
      AND endpoint_interface.vpc_id = vpc.id
  );

-- Preview the changes
SELECT
  *
FROM

>   iasql_preview_apply ();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  iasql_preview ();
```

> -- Apply the changes
> --select * from iasql_apply();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- Commit the changes
-- select * from iasql_commit();
-- Rollback changes
-- select * from iasql_rollback();
```

```

> <p>

Reviewer: same as above, we can use the plugin

  </a>
</p>

## Endpoint gateways

An endpoint gateway is a gateway that can be configured as a target for a route in your route table, used
to access traffic in DynamoDB or S3

Multiple gateway endpoints can be created in a single VPC, and those can be used on different route tables
to enforce different access policies from different subnets to the same service.

Gateway endpoints are supported within the same region only, resources from multiple regions cannot be
accssed, even using VPC peering. They also support IPv4 traffic only.

In order to use them, DNS resolution must be enabled in the VPC.

When a route is added, all instances in the subnets associated with the route table will automatically
use the endpoint to access the service.

Gateway endpoints only support S3 and DynamoDB services. <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/gateway-endpoints.html">Get more detail about gateway endpoints</a>.

This query will auto-generate the missing endpoint gateways and will allow you to preview the changes to be applied on your cloud.

```sql
 -- Inserts the missing endpoints

> INSERT INTO

Reviewer: iasql_begein()

  endpoint_gateway (region, vpc_id, service)
SELECT
  bucket.region,
  vpc.id,
  's3'
FROM
  bucket
  INNER JOIN vpc ON bucket.region = vpc.region
WHERE
  NOT EXISTS (
    SELECT
      id
    FROM
      endpoint_gateway
    WHERE
      endpoint_gateway.region = bucket.region
      AND endpoint_gateway.vpc_id = vpc.id
  )
  -- Preview the changes
SELECT
  *
FROM
  iasql_preview_apply ();

-- Apply the changes

> --select * from iasql_apply();

Reviewer: iasql_preview, iasql_commit and iasql_rollback

```

> <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/Add S3 interface endpoints/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_gateway%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%20on%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_gateway%20where%20endpoint_gateway.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_gateway.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">

Reviewer: the plugin

to control your buckets from an internal network with the desired security, and without the extra costs of a
NAT gateway.

### Why use VPC Interface Endpoints

AWS VPC Interface Endpoints are a component of AWS's <a href="https://aws.amazon.com/privatelink">PrivateLink</a> infrastructure. AWS PrivateLink provides private connectivity between virtual private clouds (VPCs),
supported AWS services, and your on-premises networks without exposing your traffic to the public internet.

Relying on PrivateLink offers a set of advantages in terms of **security** and **performance**.

**Security: no internet traversal**

When deploying services in production, the concept of defense-in-depth is essential: have an information
assurance strategy that provides multiple, redundant defensive measures in case a security control fails or
a vulnerability is exploited.
By using interface endpoints the services will be accessed via Amazon's internal networks. It is an essential
security measure, that will prevent attackers to directly reach the services by keeping them in a private
network, reducing the surface area of attack.

**Security: policies**

> AWS services can benefit of <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/access_controlling.html">IAM policies</a>

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
AWS services can benefit from <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/access_controlling.html">IAM policies</a>
```

> to perform a fine grained access control. When using interface endpoints, those policies can be applied to determine the traffic

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
for fine grained access control. When using interface endpoints, those policies can be applied to determine the traffic
```

that can pass through the interface.

**Performance: latency**

> Because of the traffic staying within Amazon’s networks, the physical distance travelled, the number of hops

Reviewer 2: Nit

```suggestion
Because the traffic stays within Amazon’s networks, the physical distance travelled, the number of hops
```

      id
    FROM
      endpoint_interface
    WHERE
      endpoint_interface.region = bucket.region
      AND endpoint_interface.vpc_id = vpc.id
  );

-- Preview the changes
SELECT
  *
FROM
  iasql_preview();

-- Commit the changes
-- SELECT * FROM iasql_commit();
-- Rollback changes
-- SELECT * FROM iasql_rollback();
```

<p>
  <a href="https://app.iasql.com/#/button/AddS3InterfaceEndpoints/--%20Inserts%20the%20missing%20endpoints%0Ainsert%20into%20endpoint_interface%28region%2C%20vpc_id%2C%20service%29%20select%20bucket.region%2C%20vpc.id%2C%20%27s3%27%20from%20bucket%20inner%20join%20vpc%0Aon%20bucket.region%3Dvpc.region%20where%20not%20exists%20%28select%20id%20from%20endpoint_interface%20where%20endpoint_interface.region%3Dbucket.region%20and%20endpoint_interface.vpc_id%3Dvpc.id%29%3B%0A--%20Preview%20the%20changes%0Aselect%20%2A%20from%20iasql_preview_apply%28%29%3B%0A--%20Apply%20the%20changes%0A--select%20%2A%20from%20iasql_apply%28%29%3B">
    <button class="button button--lg button--primary">Add missing interface endpoints</button>
  </a>
</p>

## Endpoint gateways

An endpoint gateway is a gateway that can be configured as a target for a route in your route table, used

> to access traffic in DynamoDB or S3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to access traffic in DynamoDB or S3.
```

accssed, even using VPC peering. They also support IPv4 traffic only.

In order to use them, DNS resolution must be enabled in the VPC.

When a route is added, all instances in the subnets associated with the route table will automatically
use the endpoint to access the service.

Gateway endpoints only support S3 and DynamoDB services. <a href="https://docs.aws.amazon.com/vpc/latest/privatelink/gateway-endpoints.html">Get more detail about gateway endpoints</a>.

This query will auto-generate the missing endpoint gateways and will allow you to preview the changes to be applied on your cloud.

```sql TheButton[Insert missing Gateway endpoints]="Insert missing Gateway endpoints"
 -- Inserts the missing endpoints
SELECT * FROM iasql_begin();

INSERT INTO
  endpoint_gateway (region, vpc_id, service)
SELECT
  bucket.region,
  vpc.id,
  's3'
FROM
  bucket
  INNER JOIN vpc ON bucket.region = vpc.region
WHERE
  NOT EXISTS (
    SELECT
      id
    FROM
      endpoint_gateway
    WHERE
      endpoint_gateway.region = bucket.region
      AND endpoint_gateway.vpc_id = vpc.id
  )
  -- Preview the changes
SELECT * FROM iasql_preview();

-- Commit the changes

> -- select * from iasql_commit();

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
-- SELECT * FROM iasql_commit();
```
